Good day, sir.
I am glad you're well.
I have not seen you long.
How goes the world?
Oh, it wears, sir, as it grows.
Ay, that's well known: but what particular rarity?
What strange,
which manifold record not matches?
See, magic of bounty!
All these spirits thy powers have conjured to attend.
I know the merchant.
I know them both; the other's a jeweller.
Oh, 'tis a worthy lord.
Nay, that's most fixed.
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,
to an untirable and continuate goodness:
he passes.
I have a jewel here
Oh, pray, let's see it.
For the Lord Timon, sir?
If he will touch the estimate:
but, for that
'Tis a good form.
And rich, yes.
You are rapt, sir, in some work,
some dedication to the great Lord.
A thing slipped idly from me.
Our poesy is as a gum
which oozes from whence 'tis nourished:
the fire in the flint shows not till it be struck;
our gentle flame provokes itself
and like the current flies each bound it chafes.
What have you there?
A picture, sir.
When comes your book forth?
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
Let's see your piece.
It's a good piece.
Oh, so 'tis:
this comes off well and excellent.
Indifferent.
Admirable: how this grace speaks his own standing.
What a mental power this eye shoots forth.
How big imagination moves in this lip.
To the dumbness of the gesture one might interpret.
It's a pretty mocking of the life.
Here is a touch; is it good?
I will say of it, it tutors nature:
Artificial strife lives in these touches,
livelier than life.
How this lord is followed.
The senators of Athens: happy man.
Look, more.
You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors?
I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man,
whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
with amplest entertainment:
my free drift halts not particularly,
but moves itself in a wide sea of tacks:
no levelled malice infects one comma in the course I hold;
but flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,
leaving no tract behind.
How shall I understand you?
I will unbolt to you.
You see how all conditions, how all minds,
as well of glib and slippery creatures
as of grave and austere quality,
tender down their services to Lord Timon:
his large fortune upon his good and gracious nature hanging
subdues and properties to his love and tendence
all sorts of hearts;
yea, from the glass-faced flatterers
to Apemantus,
whom few things loves better than to abhor himself:
even he drops down the knee before him
and returns in peace most rich in Timon's nod.
I saw them speak together.
Sir, I have on a high and pleasant hill
feigned fortune to be throned: the base of the mount
is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures,
that labor on the bosom of this sphere
to propagate their states.
Amongst them all, whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,
one do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
whom fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her;
whose present grace to present slaves and servants
translates his rivals.
'Tis conceived to scope.
This throne, this fortune, and this hill, methinks,
with one man beckoned from the rest below,
bowing his head against the sleepy mount
to climb his happiness,
would be well expressed in our condition.
Nay, sir, but hear me on.
All those which were his fellows but of late
Mmm.
No, no, no, no.  No, no, no.
But of late.
Even better than his value,
on the moment follow his strides,
his lobbies fill with tendance,
rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
make sacred even his stirrup,
and through him drink the free air.
Ay, marry, what of these?
When fortune in her shift and change of mood
spurns down her late beloved,
all his dependants that labor after him
to the mountain's top, even on their knees and hands,
let him slip down,
not one accompanying his declining foot.
'Tis common: a thousand moral paintings I can show
that shall demonstrate these quick blows of fortune's
more pregnantly than words.
Yet you do well to show Lord Timon
that mean eyes have seen the foot above the head.
Imprisoned is he, say you?
Ay, my good lord.
Five talents is his debt,
his means most short, his creditors most strait:
your honorable letter he desires
to those have shut him up;
which failing, periods his comfort.
Noble Ventidius!
Well; I am not of that feather to shake off my friend
when he must needs me.
I do know him a gentleman well deserves a help:
which he shall have: I'll pay the debt and free him.
Your Lordship ever binds him.
Commend me to him.
I will send his ransom;
and being enfranchised, bid him come to me.
'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
but to support him after.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
Freely, good father.
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
Yes, I have so: what of him?
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Attends he here, or no?
Lucilius!
Here, at Your Lordship's service.
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature
at night frequents my house.
I am a man that from my first have been inclined to thrift;
and my estate deserves an heir more raised
than one which holds a trencher.
Well; what further?
One only daughter have I, no kin else,
on whom I may confer what I have got.
The maid is fair, of the youngest for a bride,
and I have bred her at my dearest cost
in qualities of the best.
This man of thine attempts her love.
I prithee, noble Lord, join with me
to forbid him her resort;
myself have spoke in vain.
The man is honest.
Therefore he will be, Timon:
his honesty rewards him in itself;
it must not bear my daughter.
Does she love him?
She is young and apt.
Our own precedent passions do instruct us
what levity's in youth.
And love you the maid?
Ay, my good Lord, and she accepts of it.
If, in her marriage, my consent is missing,
I call the gods to witness,
I will choose mine heir from forth the beggars of this world,
and dispossess her all!
How shall she be endowed,
if she be mated with an equal husband?
Three talents on the present; in future, all.
This gentleman of mine hath served me long.
To build his fortune, I will strain a little,
for 'tis a bond in men.
Give him thy daughter.
What you bestow, in him, I'll counterpoise,
make him weigh with her.
My noble Lord,
pawn me to this your honor, she is his.
My hand to you; my honor on my promise.
Humbly I thank Your Lordship.
Never may that state of fortune fall into my keeping,
that is not owed to you.
Vouchsafe my labor, and long live Your Lordship!
I thank you; you shall hear from me anon.
What have you there, my friend?
A piece of painting, which I do beseech Your Lordship to accept.
Painting is welcome.
Painting is almost the natural man;
or since dishonor traffics with man's nature,
he is but outside.
these pencilled figures are even such as they give out.
I like your work; you shall find I like it.
Wait attendance till you hear further from me.
The gods preserve you!
Well fare you, gentleman.
Give me your hand; we must needs dine together, hmm?
Sir, sir, your jewel hath suffered under praise.
What, my lord?
Dispraise?
A mere satiety of commendations.
If I should pay you for it as 'tis extolled,
it would unclew me quite.
My lord, 'tis rated as those which sell would give.
But you well know, things of like value
differing in the owners
are prized by their masters.
Believe it, dear lord,
you mend the jewel by the wearing it.
Well mocked.
Oh, no, my good lord;
he speaks the common tongue, which all men speak with him.
Look, who comes here: will you be chid?
We'll bear, with Your Lordship.
We'll spare none.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus.
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;
when thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
Why dost thou call them knaves?
Thou knowest them not.
Are they not Athenians?
Yes.
Then I repent not.
You know me, Apemantus?
Thou knowest I do: I called thee by thy name.
Thou art proud, Apemantus.
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
Whither art going?
To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
That's a deed thou'lt die for.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.
How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?
The best, for the innocence.
Wrought he not well that painted it?
He wrought better that made the painter;
and yet he's but a filthy piece of work.
You're a dog.
Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog?
Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
No; I eat not lords.
And thou shouldst, thou wouldst anger ladies.
O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
That's a lascivious apprehension.
So thou apprehendest it.
Take it for thy labor.
How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
Not as well as plain dealing,
which will not cost a man a doit.
What dost thou think 'tis worth?
Not worth my thinking.
How now, poet!
How now, philosopher!
Thou liest.
Art not one?
Yes.
Then I lie not.
Art not a poet?
Yes.
Then thou liest.
Look in thy last work,
where thou hast feigned him a worthy fellow.
That's not feigned; he is so.
Yes, he is worthy of thee and to pay thee for thy labor.
He that loves to be flattered is worthy of the flatterer.
Heavens, that I were a lord.
What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
Even as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with my heart.
What, thyself?
Ay.
Wherefore?
That I had no angry wit to be a lord.
Art not thou a merchant?
Ay, Apemantus.
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
If traffic do it, the gods do it.
Traffic's thy god; and thy god confound thee.
What trumpet's that?
'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
all of companionship.
Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.
Now go not you hence till I've thanked you.
When dinner's done, you show me this piece.
I am joyful of your sights.
Oh.
Most welcome, sir!
Sir, you have saved my longing,
and I feed most hungerly on your sight.
Right welcome, sir!
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
in different pleasures.
Pray, pray let us in.
So, so, there!
Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
That there should be small love among these sweet knaves,
and all this courtesy.
The strain of man's bred out into baboon and monkey
What time of day is it, Apemantus?
Time to be honest.
That time serves still.
The more accursed thou, that still omittest it.
Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?
Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
Fare thee well, fare thee well.
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
Why, Apemantus?
Shouldst have kept one to thyself,
for I mean to give thee none.
Hang thyself!
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding:
make thy requests to thy friend.
Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence!
I will fly, like a dog, the heels of the ass.
Hee-haw.
He's opposite to humanity.
Come, shall we in, and taste Lord Timon's bounty?
He outgoes the very heart of kindness.
He pours it out;
Plutus, the god of gold, is but his steward.
No meed, but he repays sevenfold above itself;
no gift to him, but breeds the giver a return
exceeding all use of quittance.
The noblest mind he carries that ever governed man.
Long may he live in fortunes.
Shall we in?
I'll keep you company.
Most honored Timon!
Ventidius!
Oh!
It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age,
and call him to long peace.
He is gone happy, and has left me rich.
And, as in grateful virtue I am bound to your free heart,
I do return those talents,
doubled with thanks and service,
from whose help I derived liberty.
Oh, by no means, honest Ventidius;
you mistake my love:
I gave it freely ever;
and there's none can truly say he gives,
if he receives.
If our betters play at that game,
we must not dare to imitate them.
Faults that are rich are fair.
A noble spirit.
Nay, my lord.
Ceremony was but devised at first
to set a gloss on faint deeds,
hollow welcomes, recanting goodness,
sorry ere 'tis shown;
But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
Pray, sit;
more welcome are ye to my fortunes
than my fortunes are to me.
My lord, we have always confessed it.
Oh, confessed it!
Hanged it, have you not?
Oh, Apemantus, you are welcome.
No, you shall not make me welcome.
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
Fie, thou art a churl;
you've a humor there does not become a man:
'tis much to blame.
They say, my lords, "ira furor brevis est;"
but yond man is ever angry.
Go, let him have a table by himself,
for he does neither affect company,
nor is he fit for it, indeed.
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon.
I come to observe;
I give thee warning on it.
I take no heed of thee;
Thou art an Athenian, therefore welcome:
I myself would have no power;
prithee, let my meat make thee silent.
I scorn thy meat;
'twould choke me, for I should ne'er flatter thee.
O you gods, what a number of men eats Timon,
and he sees 'em not!
It grieves me to see so many
dip their meat in one man's blood;
and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men:
Methinks they should invite them without knives;
good for their meat, and safer for their lives.
There's much example for it;
the fellow that sits next him, now parts bread with him,
pledges the breath of him in a divided draught,
is the readiest man to kill him.
It has been proved.
If I were a huge man, I would fear to drink at meals
lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
My lords, in heart.
And let the health go round.
Let it flow this way, my good lord.
Flow this way!
A brave fellow!
He keeps his tides well.
Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.
Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner,
honest water,
which ne'er left man in the mire:
It and my food are equals;
there's no odds.
Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.
Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
I pray for no man but myself.
Grant I may never prove so fond
to trust man on his oath or bond;
or a harlot, for her weeping;
or a dog, that seems a-sleeping;
or a keeper with my freedom;
or my friends, if I should need 'em.
Amen.
So fall to it.
Rich men sin, and I eat root.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus.
All!
May it please Your Honor.
Lord Lucius, out of his free love,
hath presented to you four milk-white horses
trapped in silver.
I shall accept them fairly.
Let the presents be worthily entertained.
Please you, my lord,
Lord Lucullus entreats your company tomorrow
to hunt with him,
and has sent Your Honor two brace of greyhounds.
I'll hunt with him.
Let them be well received, not without fair reward.
Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
My heart's ever at your service, my good lord.
Had you rather be at a breakfast of enemies
than a dinner of friends?
So they were bleeding-new, my lord,
there's no meat like them:
I could wish my best friend at such a feast.
Would all those flatterers were thy enemies then,
that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em!
Might we but have that happiness, my lord,
that you would once use our hearts,
whereby we might express some part of our zeals,
we should think ourselves forever perfect.
No doubt, my good friends, but the gods themselves
have provided I shall have much help from you.
How had you been my friends else?
Why have you that charitable title from thousands,
did not you chiefly belong to my heart?
I have told more of you to myself
than you can with modesty speak in your own behalf;
and thus far, I confirm you.
O you gods, think I, what need we have any friends,
should we ne'er have need of 'em?
They're the most needless creatures living,
should we ne'er have use of 'em,
and should most resemble sweet instruments
hung up in cases that keep their sounds to themselves.
Why, I have often wished myself poorer,
that I might come nearer to you.
We're born to do benefits:
and what better or properer can we call our own
than the riches of our friends?
O, what a precious comfort 'tis,
to have so many, like brothers,
commanding one another's fortunes.
Oh, joy's even made a way ere it can be born.
Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks.
To forget their faults, I drink to you.
Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.
Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
and that instant, like a babe, sprung up.
I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.
Much!
How now? What means that trump?
Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies
most desirous of admittance.
Ladies!
What are their wills?
There comes with them a forerunner, my lord,
which bears that office, to signify their pleasures.
Well, let them have kind admittance.
Music, make their welcome.
Hail, hail, hail to thee, worthy Timon,
and to all that of his bounties taste!
The five best senses acknowledge thee their patron;
and come freely to gratulate thy plenteous bosom:
There, taste, touch, all,
there, taste, touch, all,
pleased from thy table rise;
They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
You see, my lord, how ample you are beloved?
Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!
They dance.
They are mad women.
Like madness is the glory of this life.
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves;
and spend our flatteries to drink those men
upon whose age we void it up again
with poisonous spite and envy.
Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
of their friends' gift?
I should fear that those that dance before me now
would one day stamp upon me.
It has been done.
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
set a fair fashion on our entertainment.
I am to thank you for it.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
'Faith, for the worst is filthy;
and would not hold taking, I doubt me.
Flavius, the little casket bring me hither.
Yes, my lord.
More jewels yet!
There is no crossing him in his humor;
Else I should tell him
well, in faith I should
when all's spent,
he would be crossed then, he could.
'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,
that man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
Ah, Flavius.
My lord, honor me so much as to advance this jewel;
accept it and wear it, kind my lord.
I am so far already in your gifts
So are we all.
I beseech Your Honor, vouchsafe me a word;
it does concern you near.
Near!
Why, then, another time I'll hear:
What will this come to?
He commands us to provide and give great gifts,
and all out of an empty coffer:
Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,
to show him what a beggar his heart is,
being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state
that what he speaks is all in debt;
he owes for every word.
He is so kind that he now pays interest for it;
his land's put to their books.
Well, would I were gently put out of office
before I were forced out.
Happier is he that has no friend to feed
than such that do even enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my lord.
You do yourselves too much wrong,
you bate too much of your own merits:
Here, my lord, a token of our love.
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
O, he is the very soul of bounty!
Now I do remember, my lord,
you gave good words the other day
of a bay courser I rode on:
it is yours, because you liked it.
Oh, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.
You may take my word.
I know no man can justly praise but what he does affect:
I weigh my friend's affection with mine own;
I'll tell you true.
I'll call to you.
Oh, none so welcome.
I take all and your several visitations so kind to heart,
'tis not enough to give;
methinks I could deal kingdoms to my friends
and ne'er be weary.
Alcibiades, thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich;
It comes in charity to thee:
for all thy living is amongst the dead.
All the lands thou hast lie in a pitched field.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
We are so virtuously bound.
And I to you.
So infinitely endeared
So I to you.
Lights, more lights!
The best of happiness, honor and fortunes,
keep with you, Lord Timon!
Ready for his friends.
What a coil's here.
Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums.
I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
that are paid for them.
Friendship's full of dregs.
Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs,
thus honest fools lay out their wealth on curtsies.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen,
I would be good to thee.
No, I'll nothing:
for if I should be bribed too,
there would be none left to rail upon thee,
and then thou wouldst sin the faster.
Thou givest so long, Timon,
I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in paper shortly:
what need these feasts, pomps and vainglories?
Nay, and you begin to rail upon society once,
I am sworn not to give regard to you.
Farewell.
Come again with better music.
So thou wilt not hear me now;
thou shalt not then:
I'll lock thy heaven from thee.
Oh, that men's ears should be to counsel deaf,
but not to flattery.
Here, my lord.
Haste you to Lord Timon;
Importune him for my moneys;
be not ceased by slight denial,
nor then silenced when
"Commend me to your master,"
and the cap plays in the right hand, thus.
But tell him, my uses cry to me,
I must serve my turn out of mine own.
His days and times are past
and my reliance on his fracted dates
have smit my credit:
I love and honor him,
but I must not break my back to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs,
and my relief must not be tossed and turned to me in words,
but find supply immediate.
Get you gone.
Put on a most importunate aspect,
a visage of demand, for, I do fear,
when every feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
which flashes now a phoenix.
Get you gone.
I go, sir.
Take the bonds along with you,
I will, sir.
Have the dates in contempt.
Go.
No care, no stop!
So senseless of expense,
that he will neither know how to maintain it,
nor cease his flow of riot.
Takes no account how things go from him,
nor resumes no care of what is to continue.
Never mind was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
Oh, what shall be done?
He will not hear, till feel.
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie!
Good even.
What, you come for money?
Is it your business too?
'Tis, and yours?
Would we were all discharged!
I fear it.
Here comes the lord.
So soon as dinner's done,
we'll forth again, my Alcibiades.
With me?
What is your will?
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Dues?
Whence are you?
Of Athens here, my lord.
Go to my steward.
Please it, Your Lordship,
he has put me out to the succession
of new days this month.
My master is awaked to great occasion
to call upon his own,
and humbly prays you that, with your other noble parts,
you'll suit in giving him his right.
Mine honest friend, I prithee, but repair to me next morning.
Nay, good my lord!
Contain thyself, good friend.
One Varro's servant, my good
From Isidore;
he humbly prays your speedy payment.
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants
'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks and past.
Give me breath!
My lords, I beseech you, keep on;
I'll wait upon you instantly.
Come hither, I pray you.
I beseech you, how goes the world
that I am thus encountered with clamorous demands
of debt, broken bonds,
and the detention of long-since-due debts against my honor?
Please you, gentlemen,
the time is unagreeable to this business.
Your importunacy cease till after dinner,
that I may make His Lordship understand
wherefore you are not paid.
Do so, my friends.
Pray, you're welcome here.
I'll speak with you anon.
You make me marvel.
Wherefore ere this time
you had not fully laid my state before me,
that I might so have rated my expense,
as I had leave of means?
You would not hear me; at many leisures, I proposed.
Go to!
Perchance some single vantages you took
when my indisposition put you back,
and that unaptness made your minister,
thus to excuse yourself.
Oh, my good lord, at many times I brought in my accounts,
laid them before you.
You would throw them off
and say you found them in mine honesty.
When, for some trifling present, you have bid me return so much,
I have shook my head and wept;
Yea, against the authority of manners,
prayed you to hold your hand more close.
I have endured not seldom, nor no slight checks,
when I have prompted you in the ebb of your estate
and your great flow of debts.
My loved lord, though you hear now too late
yet now's a time
the greatest of your having lacks a half
to pay your present debts.
Let all my lands be sold.
'tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone;
and what remains will hardly stop the mouth of present dues.
The future comes apace.
What shall defend the interim?
And at length, how goes our reckoning?
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
O my good lord, the world is but a word.
Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
how quickly were it gone!
You tell me true?
If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,
call me before the exactest auditors
and set me on the proof.
So the gods bless me,
when all our offices have been oppressed with riotous feeders,
when our vaults have wept with drunken spilth of wine,
when every room was blazed with lights
and brayed with minstrelsy,
I have retired me to a wasteful cock
and set mine eyes at flow.
Prithee, no more.
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
this night englutted!
Who is not Timon's?
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is Lord Timon's?
Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!
Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
the breath is gone whereof this praise is made.
Feast-won, fast-lost;
one cloud of winter showers, these flies are couched.
Come, sermon me no further.
No villainous bounty yet hath passed my heart;
unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
Why dost thou weep?
Has thou the conscience lack to think I shall lack friends?
Secure thy heart;
if I would broach the vessels of my love,
and try the arguments of hearts by borrowing,
men and men's fortunes could I frankly use
as I can bid thee speak.
Assurance bless your thoughts!
And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crowned,
that I account them blessings;
for by these shall I try friends.
You shall see how you mistake my fortunes;
I am wealthy in my friends.
Within there!
Flaminius!
My lord?
Servilius!
I will dispatch you severally;
To Lord Lucius, you;
to Lord Lucullus, you.
I hunted with His Honor today.
To Sempronius, you.
Commend me to their loves, and, I am proud, say,
that my occasions have found time to use 'em
toward a supply of money.
Let the request be... fifty talents?
As you have said, my lord.
Lord Lucius and Lucullus, hmm?
And go you, sir, to the senators
of whom, even to the state's best health,
I have deserved this hearing
bid 'em send of the instant a thousand talents to me.
I have been bold
for that I knew it the most general way
to them to use your signet and your name;
but they do shake their heads,
and I am here no richer in return.
It is true?
Can it be?
They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,
that now they are at fall, want treasure,
cannot do what they would;
are sorry you are honorable
but yet they could have wished
they know not something hath been amiss
a noble nature may catch a wrench
would all were well  'tis pity;
and so, intending other serious matters,
after distasteful looks and these hard fractions,
with certain half-caps and cold-moving nods
they froze me into silence.
You gods, reward them!
Prithee, man, look cheerly.
These old fellows have their ingratitude in them hereditary.
Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;
'tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
and nature, as it grows again toward earth,
is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventidius.
Prithee, be not sad.
Ingeniously I speak.
No blame belongs to thee.
Ventidius lately buried his father,
by whose death he's stepped into a great estate.
When he was poor, imprisoned, and in scarcity of friends,
I cleared him with five talents.
Greet him from me;
bid him suppose some good necessity touches his friend,
which craves to be remembered with those five talents.
That had, give it these fellows to whom 'tis instant due.
Ne'er speak, or think, that Timon's fortunes
amongst his friends can sink.
I would I could not think it.
That thought is bounty's foe;
being free itself, it thinks all others so.
Flaminius, honest Flaminius;
you are very respectively welcome, sir.
And how does that honorable, complete,
free-hearted gentleman of Athens,
thy very bountiful good lord and master?
His health is well sir.
I am right glad that his health is well, sir.
And what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?
'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir;
Which, in my lord's behalf,
I come to entreat Your Honor to supply;
who, having great and instant occasion to use fifty talents,
hath sent to Your Lordship to furnish him,
nothing doubting your present assistance therein.
La, la!
La, la, la!
"Nothing doubting," says he?
Alas, good lord!
A noble gentleman 'tis,
if he would not keep so good a house.
Many a time and often I have dined with him,
and told him on it, and come again to supper to him,
of purpose to have him spend less,
and yet he would embrace no counsel,
take no warning by my coming.
Every man has his fault, and honesty is his.
I had told him on it,
but I could ne'er get him from it.
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.
I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit
give thee thy due
and one that knows what belongs to reason;
and canst use the time well, if the time use thee well.
Good parts in thee.
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius.
Thy lord's a bountiful gentleman.
But thou art wise;
and thou knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,
that this is no time to lend money,
especially upon bare friendship, without security.
Here's three solidares for thee.
Good boy, wink at me, and say thou sawest me not.
Fare thee well.
Is it possible the world should so much differ,
and we alive that lived?
Fly, damned baseness, to him that worships thee!
Ha!
Now I see thou art a fool and fit for thy master.
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
Let molten coin be thy damnation,
thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
it turns in less than two nights?
Oh, you gods, I feel master's passion!
This slave, unto his honor, has my lord's meat in him.
Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,
when he is turned to poison?
Oh, may diseases only work upon it!
And when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature
which my lord paid for
be of any power to expel sickness,
but prolong his hour!
Servilius!
You are kindly met, sir.
Commend me to thy honorable virtuous lord,
my very exquisite friend.
May it please Your Honor, my lord hath sent
Ha! What has he sent?
I am so much endeared to that lord;
he's ever sending.
How shall I thank him, thinkest thou?
And what has he sent now?
Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;
requesting Your Lordship to supply his instant use
with so many talents.
I know His Lordship is but merry with me;
he cannot want 5,500 talents.
But in the meantime, he wants less, my lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
Upon my soul, 'tis true, sir.
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
against such a good time,
when I might have shown myself honorable.
How unluckily it happened, that I should purchase
the day before for a little part
and undo a great deal of honor.
Servilius, now, before the gods, I am not able to do
the more beast, I say.
I was sending to use Lord Timon myself,
But I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done it now.
Commend me bountifully to His good Lordship;
and I hope His Honor will conceive the fairest of me,
because I have no power to be kind.
And tell him this from me,
I count it one of my greatest afflictions, say,
that I cannot pleasure such an honorable gentleman.
Good Servilius, will you befriend me so far
as to use mine own words to him?
Yes, sir, I shall.
I'll look you out a good turn,
Servilius.
Must he needs trouble me in it, hmm,
above all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
and now Ventidius is wealthy too,
whom he redeemed from prison.
all these owe their estates unto him.
My lord, they've all been touched and found base metal,
for they have all denied him.
How!
Have they denied him?
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?
And does he send to me?
Three?
Hum!
It shows but little love or judgment in him.
Must I be his last refuge?
His friends, like physicians, thrice give him over.
Must I take the cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in it;
I'm angry at him, that might have known my place.
I see no sense for it,
but his occasions might have wooed me first;
for, in my conscience, I was the first man
that e'er received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now
that I'll requite it last?
No.
So it may prove an argument of laughter to the rest,
and I amongst the lords be thought a fool.
I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum
had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
I'd such a courage to do him good.
But now return, and with their faint reply this answer join:
who bates mine honor shall not know my coin.
One of Lord Timon's men.
Flaminius!
Sir, a word.
Pray, is my lord ready to come forth?
No, indeed, he is not.
We attend His Lordship;
pray, signify so much.
I need not tell him that!
He knows you are too diligent.
Is not that his steward muffled so?
He goes away in a cloud.
Call him.
Ho! Do you hear, sir?
By your leave, sir,
What do ye ask of me, my friend?
We wait for certain money here, sir.
Ay, if money were as certain as your waiting,
'twere sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and bills,
when your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
and take down the interest into their gluttonous maws.
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up.
Let me pass quietly.
Believe it, my lord and I have made an end;
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
Ay, but this answer will not serve.
If 'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you;
For you serve knaves.
How, what does his cashiered worship mutter?
No matter what; he's poor, and that's revenge enough.
Here comes Servilius;
now we shall know some answer.
If I might beseech you, gentlemen,
to repair some other hour,
I should derive much from it;
for take it of my soul,
my lord leans wondrously to discontent.
His comfortable temper has forsook him;
he's much out of health and keeps his chamber.
Many who keep their chambers are not sick.
And if it be so far beyond his health,
methinks he should the sooner pay his debts
and make a clear way to the gods.
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
Aah!
Are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free,
and must my house now be my retentive enemy, my jail?
The place which I have feasted, does it now, like all mankind,
show me an iron heart?
My lord, here is my bill.
Here's mine.
And mine, my lord.
Knock me down with 'em.
Cleave me to the girdle.
Alas, my lord
Cut my heart in sums.
Mine, fifty talents.
Tell out my blood!
Five thousand crowns, my lord.
Five thousand drops pays that.
What's yours?
Alas, my lord
The gods fall upon you!
They have even put my breath from me, the slaves.
Creditors?
Devils!
My dear lord
What if it should be so?
My lord
I'll have it so.
My steward!
Here, my lord.
So fitly?
Go, bid all my friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius.
All.
I'll once more feast the rascals.
O my lord, you only speak from your distracted soul;
there is not so much left to furnish out a moderate table.
Be it not in thy care.
Go, I charge thee, invite them all.
Let in the tide of knaves once more;
my cook and I'll provide.
My lord, you have my voice to it;
the fault's Bloody;
'tis necessary he should die.
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Most true.
The law shall bruise him.
Honor, health, and compassion to the senate.
Now, Captain?
I am an humble suitor to your virtues;
for pity is the virtue of the law,
and none but tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood,
hath stepped into the law,
which is past depth to those that, without heed,
do plunge into it.
He is a man, setting his fate aside, of comely virtues.
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice
an honor in him which buys out his fault
but with a noble fury and fair spirit,
seeing his reputation touched to death,
he did oppose his foe.
And with such sober and unnoted passion,
he did behoove his anger,
ere 'twas spent,
as if he had but proved an argument.
You undergo too strict a paradox,
striving to make an ugly deed look fair.
Your words have took such pains
as if they labored to bring manslaughter into form
and set quarrelling upon the head of valor;
which indeed is valor misbegot and came into the world
when sects and factions were newly born.
He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
the worst that man can breathe
and make his wrongs his outsides,
to wear them like his raiment, carelessly,
and ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
to bring it into danger.
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
what folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!
My lord
You cannot make gross sins look clear.
My lord!
To revenge is no valor, but to bear.
My lords, then, under favor,
pardon me, if I speak like a captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
and not endure all threats?
Sleep upon it, and let the foes quietly cut their throats,
without repugnancy?
If there be such valor in the bearing,
what make we abroad?
Why then, women are more valiant that stay at home,
if bearing carry it,
and the ass more captain than the lion,
the fellow loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
if wisdom be in suffering.
O my lords, as you are great, be pitifully good.
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust;
but, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.
To be in anger is impiety;
but who is man that is not angry?
Weigh but the crime with this.
You breathe in vain.
In vain!
His service done at Lacedaemon and Byzantium
were a sufficient briber for his life.
What's that?
I say, my lords, he has done fair service,
and slain in fight many of your enemies.
How full of valor did he bear himself in the last conflict,
and made plenteous wounds!
He has made too much plenty with 'em;
he's a sworn rioter.
He has a sin that often drowns him
and takes his valor prisoner.
If there were no foes,
that were enough to overcome him.
In the beastly fury, he has been known to commit outrages
and cherish factions.
It is inferred to us
that his days are foul and his drink dangerous.
He dies.
Hard fate!
He might have died in war.
My lords, if not for any parts in him
though his right arm might purchase his own time
and be in debt to none
yet more to move you,
take my deserts to his, and join 'em both.
And, for I know your reverend ages love security,
I'll pawn my victories, all my honors to you,
upon his good returns.
If, by this crime, he owes the law his life,
why, let the war receive it in valiant gore
for law is strict, and war is nothing more.
We are for law.
He dies.
Urge it no more, on height of our displeasure.
Friend or brother,
he forfeits his own blood that spills another.
Must it be so?
It must not be.
My lords, I do beseech you, know me.
How!
Call me to your remembrances.
What!
I cannot think but that your age has forgot me;
it could not else be, I should prove so base, to sue,
and be denied such common grace.
My wounds ache at you.
Do you dare our anger?
'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;
we banish thee forever.
Banish me!
Banish your dotage;
banish usury, that makes the senate ugly.
If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,
attend our weightier judgment.
And, not to swell our spirit, he shall be executed presently.
Now the gods keep you old enough;
that you may live only in bone, that none may look on you!
I'm worse than mad.
I have kept back their foes,
while they have told their money
and let out their coin upon large interest,
I myself rich only in large hurts.
All those for this?
Is this the balsam that the usuring senate
pours into captains' wounds?
Banishment.
It comes not ill;
I hate not to be banished;
it is a cause worthy my spleen and fury
that I may strike at Athens.
I'll cheer up my discontented troops
and lay for hearts.
'Tis honor with most lands to be at odds;
soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
The good time of day to you, sir.
I also wish it to you.
I think this honorable lord did but try us this other day.
Upon that were my thoughts tiring,
when we encountered.
I hope it is not so low with him
as he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.
It should not be,
by the persuasion of his new feasting.
I should think so.
He hath sent me an earnest inviting,
which many my near occasions did urge me to put off;
but he hath conjured me beyond them,
and I must needs appear.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate business,
but he would not hear my excuse.
I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me,
that my provision was out.
I am sick of that grief too,
as I understand how all things go.
Every man here's so.
What would he have borrowed of you?
A thousand pieces.
He sent to me, sir
Here he comes.
With all my heart, gentlemen both.
How fare you?
Ever at the best, hearing well of Your Lordship.
The swallow follows not summer
more willing than we, Your Lordship.
Nor more willingly leaves winter;
such summer-birds are men.
Our dinner will not recompense this long stay.
Feast your ears with the music awhile,
if they will fare so harshly of the trumpet's sound;
we will to it presently.
I hope it remains not unkindly with Your Lordship
that I returned you an empty messenger.
O, sir, let it not trouble you.
My noble lord
My good friend, what cheer?
My most honorable lord, I am even sick of shame that,
when this other day Your Lordship sent to me,
I was so unfortunate a beggar.
Think not on it.
If you had sent but two hours before
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Come, bring in all together.
All covered dishes.
Royal cheer, I warrant you.
I doubt not that,
if money and the season can yield it.
How do you?
What's the news?
Alcibiades is banished.
Hear you of it?
Alcibiades banished.
'Tis so; be sure of it.
How, how?
I pray you, upon what?
My worthy friends, will you draw near?
I'll tell you more anon.
Here's a noble feast toward.
This is the old man still.
Will it do? Will it do?
It does.
But time will, and so
I do conceive.
Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would
to the lip of his mistress.
Your diet shall be in all places alike.
Make not a city feast of it, to let the meat cool
ere we can agree upon the first place.
Sit, sit.
The gods require our thanks.
You great benefactors,
sprinkle our society with thankfulness.
For your own gifts, let yourselves be praised.
But reserve still to give, lest your deities be despised.
Lend to each man enough,
that one need not lend to another;
for, were your godheads to borrow of men,
men would forsake the gods.
Let the meat be beloved
more than the man that gives it.
Let no assembly of twenty be without a score of villains.
if there sit twelve women at the table,
let a dozen of them be as they are.
The rest of your fees, you gods
the senators of Athens,
together with the common lag of people
what is amiss in them,
you gods, make suitable for destruction.
For these, my present friends, as they are nothing to me,
so in nothing bless them,
and to nothing are they welcome.
Uncover, dogs, and lap.
What does His Lordship mean?
I know not.
May you a better feast never behold,
you knot of mouth-friends.
Smoke and lukewarm water is your perfection.
This is Timon's last;
who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
your reeking villainy.
Live loathed and long,
most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
you fools of fortune, trencher-friends,
cap and knee slaves, vapors, minute-jacks!
Of man and beast the infinite malady crust you quite o'er!
What, dost thou go?
All in motion soft!
Take thy physic first thou too
and thou
Stay, I'll lend thee money, borrow none.
Henceforth be no feast,
whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
Burn, house!
Sink, Athens!
Henceforth hated be of Timon
man and all humanity!
Matrons, turn incontinent!
Obedience, fail in children!
Slaves and fools,
pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench,
and minister in their steads!
To general filths convert of the instant,
green virginity, do it in your parents' eyes!
Bankrupts, hold fast;
rather than render back, out with your knives,
and cut your trusters' throats!
Bound servants, steal!
Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
and pill by law.
Maid, to thy master's bed;
thy mistress is of the brothel!
Son of sixteen, pluck the lined crutch
from thy old limping sire, with it, beat out his brains!
Piety and fear, religion to the gods,
peace, justice, truth, domestic awe, night-rest,
neighborhood, instruction, manners,
mysteries, trades,
decline to your confounding contraries,
and let confusion live!
Plagues, incident to men,
your potent and infectious fevers heap on Athens,
ripe for stroke!
Thou cold sciatica, cripple our senators,
that their limbs may halt as lamely as their manners.
Lust and liberty creep into the minds and marrows of our youth,
that 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive,
and drown themselves in riot!
Itches, blains, sow all the Athenian bosoms;
and their crop be general leprosy!
Breath infect breath, that their society,
as their friendship, may be merely poisoned!
Nothing I'll bear from thee but nakedness,
thou detestable town!
Take thou that with multiplying bans!
The gods confound
hear me, you good gods all
the Athenians both within and out that wall!
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
to the whole race of mankind, high and low!
Amen.
Hear you!
Master steward?
Where's our master?
Are we undone?
Cast off? Nothing remaining?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
I am as poor as you.
Such a house broke?
So noble a master fallen?
All gone, and not one friend to take his fortune by the arm,
and go along with him?
As we do turn our back from our companion
thrown into his grave,
so his familiars to his buried fortunes
slink all away,
leave their false vows in him,
like empty purses picked;
and his poor self, a dedicated beggar to the air,
with his disease of all-shunned poverty,
walks, like contempt, alone.
More of our fellows.
All broken implements of a ruined house.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;
that see I by our faces;
we are fellows still, serving alike in sorrow.
Leaked is our bark, and we, poor mates,
stand on the dying deck, hearing the surges threat.
We must all part into this sea of air.
Good fellows all, the latest of my wealth
I'll share amongst you.
Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake,
let's yet be fellows;
let's shake our heads and say,
as 'twere a knell unto our master's fortune,
"We have seen better days."
Let each take some;
nay, put out all your hands.
Not one word more.
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Oh, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us.
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
since riches point to misery and contempt?
Who would be so mocked with glory?
Or to live but in a dream of friendship?
To have his pomp and all what state compounds
but only painted, like his varnished friends?
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
undone by goodness.
Strange, unusual blood, when man's worst sin is
he does too much good.
Who, then, dares to be half so kind again?
For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.
My dearest lord, blessed, to be most accursed,
rich, only to be wretched,
thy great fortunes are made thy chief afflictions.
Alas, kind lord.
He's flung in rage
from this ingrateful seat of monstrous friends,
nor has he with him to supply his life,
or that which can command it.
I'll follow and inquire him out.
I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;
whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.
O blessed breeding sun,
draw from the earth rotten humidity;
below thy sister's orb, infect the air!
Twin brothers of one womb,
whose procreation, residence, and birth
scarce is dividant,
touch them with several fortunes;
the greater scorns the lesser.
Not nature, to whom all sores lay siege,
can bear great fortune,
but by contempt of nature.
Raise me this beggar, deny it that lord;
the senator shall bear contempt hereditary,
the beggar, native honor.
It is the pasture lards, the brother's sides,
the want that makes him lean.
Who dares, who dares,
in purity of manhood stand upright,
and say, "This man's a flatterer"?
If one be, so are they all;
for every grise of fortune is smoothed by that below.
The learned pate ducks to the golden fool.
All is oblique;
there's nothing level in our cursed natures,
but direct villainy.
Therefore, be abhorred
all feasts, societies, throngs of men.
His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains.
Destruction fang mankind!
Earth, yield me roots.
Who seeks for better of thee,
sauce his palate with thy most operant poison.
What is here?
Gold?
Yellow, glittering, precious gold?
No, gods, I'm no idle votarist!
Roots, you clear heavens!
Thus much of this will make black white,
foul fair, wrong right, base noble,
old young, coward valiant.
Ha, you gods!
What this?
Why, this will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
pluck pillows from beneath stout men's heads.
This yellow slave will knit and break religions,
bless the accursed, make the hoar leprosy adored,
place thieves and give them title, knee and approbation
with senators on the bench.
Why, this is it that makes the wappened widow wed again;
she whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores
would cast the gorge at,
this embalms and spices to the April day again.
Come, damned earth, thou common whore of mankind,
that puttest odds among the route of nations,
I will make thee do thy right nature.
Ha!
A drum?
Thou art quick, but yet I'll bury thee.
Thou go, strong thief,
when gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
What art thou there?
Speak.
A beast, as thou art.
The canker gnaw thy heart,
for showing me again the eyes of man.
What is thy name?
Is man so hateful to thee that art thyself a man?
I am Misanthropos and hate mankind.
For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog
that I might love thee something.
I know thee well;
but in thy fortunes am unlearned and strange.
I know thee too;
and more than that I know thee, I not desire to know.
Follow thy drum;
with man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules.
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
what should war be?
This fell whore of thine hath in her more destruction
than thy sword, for all her cherubim look.
Oh, thy lips rot off!
I'll not kiss thee;
then the rot returns to thine own lips again.
How came the noble Timon to this change?
As the moon does, by wanting light to give.
But then renew I could not, like the moon;
there were no suns to borrow of.
Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?
None, but to maintain my opinion.
What is it, Timon?
Promise me friendship, but perform none.
If thou wilt not promise, the gods plague thee,
for thou art a man.
If thou dost perform, confound thee,
for thou art a man!
I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.
Thou sawest them, when I had prosperity.
I see them now;
then was a blessed time.
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
Is this the Athenian minion
the world has voiced so regardfully?
Art thou Timandra?
Yes.
Be a whore still.
They love thee not that use thee;
give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
Make use of thy salt hours.
Season the slaves for tubs and baths;
bring down rose-cheeked youth to the tub-fast and diet.
Hang thee, monster!
Pardon him, sweet Timandra;
his wits are drowned and lost in his calamities.
I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,
the want whereof doth daily make revolt
in my penurious band.
I have heard, and grieved, how cursed Athens,
mindless of thy worth,
forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbor states,
but for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them
I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.
I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
I had rather be alone!
Why, fare thee well.
Here is some gold for thee.
Keep it; I cannot eat it.
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap
Warrest thou against Athens?
Ay, Timon, and have cause.
The gods confound them all in thy conquest;
and thee after, when thou hast conquered!
Why me, Timon?
That, by killing of villains,
thou was born to conquer my country.
Put up thy gold.
Go on
here's gold
go on;
be as a planetary plague,
when Jove will over some high-viced city
hang his poison in the sick air.
Let not thy sword skip one.
Pity not honored age for his white beard;
he is an usurer.
Strike me the counterfeit matron;
it is her habit only that is honest,
herself's a bawd.
Let not the virgin's cheek make soft thy trenchant sword;
for those milk paps, that through the window-bars
bore at men's eyes,
are not within the leaf of pity writ,
but set them down horrible traitors.
Spare not the babe, whose dimpled smiles
from fools exhaust their mercy;
think it a bastard,
whom the oracle hath doubtfully pronounced
the throat shall cut,
and mince it sans remorse.
Swear against objects;
put armor on thine ears and on thine eyes;
whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,
shall pierce a jot.
There's gold to pay thy soldiers.
Make large confusion;
and, thy fury spent, confounded be thyself!
Speak not, be gone.
Hast thou gold yet?
I'll take the gold thou givest me,
not all thy counsel.
Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee!
Give us some gold, good Timon.
Hast thou more?
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
and to make whores, a bawd.
Hold up, you sluts, your aprons mountant.
You are not oathable, although, I know, you'll swear,
terribly swear into strong shudders
and heavenly agues the immortal gods that hear you
spare your oaths, I'll trust to your conditions.
Be whores still;
and he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up;
let your close fire predominate his smoke,
and be no turncoats.
Yet may your pains, six months, be quite contrary.
And thatch your poor thin roofs with burthens of the dead
some that were hanged, no matter
wear them, betray with them.
Whore still;
paint till a horse may mire upon your face,
a pox of wrinkles!
Well, more gold.
What then?
Believe it that we'll do anything for gold.
Consumptions sow in hollow bones of man;
strike their sharp shins, and mar men's spurring.
Crack the lawyer's voice,
that he may never more false title plead,
nor sound his quillets shrilly.
Hoar the flamen, who scolds against the quality of flesh,
and not believes himself.
Down with the nose, down with it flat;
take the bridge quite away of him that,
his particular to foresee, smells from the general weal.
Make curled-pate ruffians bald;
and let the unscarred braggarts of the war
derive some pain from you.
Plague all;
that your activity may defeat and quell
the source of all erection.
There's more gold.
Gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
and ditches grave you all.
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
More gold and more mischief first;
I've given you earnest.
Strike up the drum towards Athens!
Farewell, Timon.
If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
I never did thee harm!
Yes, thou spokest well of me.
Callest thou that harm?
Men daily find it.
Get thee gone, and take thy beagles with thee.
We but offend him.
Strike!
That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,
should yet be hungry.
Common mother, thou, whose womb immeasurable,
and infinite breast, teems and feeds all;
whereof thine proud child, arrogant man, is puffed,
engenders the black toad and adder blue,
the gilded newt and eyeless venomed worm,
with all the abhorred births below crisp heaven
whereon Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine;
yield him, whom all the human sons do hate,
from forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root.
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb;
let it no more bring out ingrateful man.
Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, bears;
teem with new monsters,
whom thy upward face to the marbled mansion
all above hath never presented.
A root!
Dear thanks!
Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas;
whereof ingrateful man,
with liquorish draughts and morsels unctuous,
greases his pure mind,
that from it all consideration slips.
More man.
Plague, plague!
I was directed hither.
Men report thou dost affect my manners
and dost use them.
'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
whom I would imitate.
Consumption catch thee!
This is in thee a nature but infected;
a poor unmanly melancholy sprung from change of fortune.
Why this spade?
This place?
This slave-like habit?
And these looks of care?
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft;
hug their diseased perfumes,
and have forgot that ever Timon was.
No, no, no!
Shame not this place
by putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatterer now,
and seek to thrive by that which has undone thee.
Hinge thy knee, and let his very breath,
whom thoust observe, blow off thy cap;
praise his most vicious strain, and call it excellent.
Thou wast told thus;
thou gavest thine ears like tapsters
that bid welcome to knaves and all approachers.
'Tis most just that thou turn rascal;
hadst thou wealth again, rascals should have it.
Do not assume my likeness.
Were I like thee, I'd throw away myself.
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;
a madman so long, now a fool.
What, thinkest that the bleak air,
thy boisterous chamberlain, will put thy shirt on warm?
Will the mossed trees that have outlived the eagle
page thy heels, and skip where thou pointest out?
Will the cold brook, candied with ice,
caudle thy morning taste,
to cure thy o'er-night's surfeit?
Call the creatures whose naked natures
live in all the spite of wreakful heaven,
whose bare unhoused trunks,
to the conflicting elements exposed,
answer mere nature;
bid them flatter thee;
oh, thou shalt find
A fool of thee.
Depart.
I love thee better now than e'er I did.
I hate thee worse.
Why?
Thou flatterest misery.
I flatter not;
but say thou art a caitiff.
Why dost thou seek me out?
To vex thee.
Always a villain's office or a fool's.
Dost please thyself in it?
Ay.
What! A knave too?
If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on
to castigate thy pride, 'twere well.
But thou dost it enforcedly;
thou wouldst courtier be again, wert thou not beggar.
Willing misery outlives encertain pomp,
is crowned before.
The one is filling still, never complete;
the other, at high wish.
Best state, contentless, hath a distracted
and most wretched being,
worse than the worst, content.
Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.
Not by his breath that is more miserable.
Thou art a slave, whom fortune's tender arm
with favor never clasped,
but bred a dog.
Hadst thou, like us from our first swath,
proceeded the sweet degrees
that this brief world affords to such
as may the passive drudges of it freely command,
thou wouldst have drowned thyself in general riot;
melted down thy youth in different beds of lust;
and never learned the icy precepts of respect,
but followed the sugared game before thee.
But myself, who had the world as my confectionary,
the eyes, the tongues, the hearts,
the mouths of men at duty,
more than I could frame employment,
these that numberless upon me stuck
as leaves do on the oak,
with one winter's brush fell from their boughs
and left me open, bare to every storm that blows.
I, to bear this, that never knew but better,
is some burden.
Thy nature did commence in sufferance,
time hath made thee hard in it.
Why dost thou hate men?
They never flattered thee.
What hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
must be thy subject,
who in spite put stuff to some she beggar
and compounded thee poor rogue hereditary.
Hence, be gone!
If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.
Art thou proud yet?
Ay, that I am not thee.
I, that I was no prodigal.
I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
I'd give thee leave to hang it.
Get thee gone.
That the whole world of Athens were in this,
thus would I eat it.
Here; I will mend thy feast.
First, mend my company; take away thyself.
So I shall mend mine own, by the lack of thine.
'Tis not well mended so; 'tis but botched;
if 'twere not, I would it were.
What wouldst thou have to Athens?
Thee thither in a whirlwind.
If thou wilt, tell them there I have gold.
Look.
See?
So I have.
Here is no use for gold.
The best and truest;
for here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.
Where liest at nights, Timon?
Under that's above me.
Where feedest thou days, Apemantus?
Where my stomach finds meat;
or, rather, where I eat it.
Would poison were obedient and knew my mind.
Where wouldst thou send it?
To sauce thy dishes.
The middle of humanity thou never knewest,
but the extremity of both ends.
When thou wast in thy gilt and thy perfume,
they mocked thee for too much curiosity;
in thy rags, thou knowest none,
but art despised for the contrary.
There's a medlar for thee; eat it.
On what I hate I feed not.
Dost hate a medlar?
Ay, e'en though it look like thee.
Hadst thou hated medlars sooner,
thou shouldst have loved thyself better now.
What man didst thou ever know unthrift
that was beloved after his means?
Who, without those means thou speaks of,
didst ever know beloved?
Myself.
I understand thee;
thou hadst some means to keep a dog.
What things in the world
canst thou nearest compare to thy flatterers?
Women nearest;
but men, men are the things themselves.
What wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus,
if it lay in your power?
Give it the beasts to be rid of the men.
Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men
and live a beast with the beasts?
Ay, Timon.
A beastly ambition,
which the gods grant thee to attain to.
Wert thou the lion, the fox would beguile thee;
wert thou the lamb, the fox would eat thee up.
Wert thou the fox, the lion would suspect thee,
when peradventure thou wert accused by the ass.
Wert thou the ass, thy dullness would torment thee,
and still thou livedst but as a breakfast to the wolf.
Wert thou the wolf, thy greediness should afflict thee,
and oft thou shouldst hazard thy life for thy dinner.
Wert thou the unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee
and make thine own self the conquest of thy fury.
Wert thou a bear, thou would be killed by a horse.
Wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by a leopard.
Wert thou a leopard, thou wert germane to the lion,
and all the spots of thy kindred were jurors on thy life.
All thy safety were remotion and thy defence absence.
What beast couldst thou be
that were not subject to a beast?
And what a beast art thou already
that seest not thy loss in transformation.
If thou couldst please me with speaking to me,
thou mightst have hit upon it here.
The commonwealth of Athens is become a forest of beasts.
How has the ass broke the wall that thou art out of the city?
Yonder comes a poet and a painter.
The plague of company light upon thee.
I will fear to catch it and give way.
When I know not what else to do, I'll see thee again.
When there is not else living but thee,
thou shalt be welcome.
I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon.
A plague upon thee.
Thou art too bad to curse.
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
There is no leprosy but what thou speakest.
If I name thee.
I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.
I would my tongue could rot them off.
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!
Choler does kill me that thou art still alive;
I swound to see thee.
Wouldst thou would burst!
Away, thou tedious rogue!
I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.
Beast!
Slave!
Toad!
Rogue, rogue, rogue!
I am sick of this false world
and will love nought but even the mere necessities upon it.
Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;
lie where the light foam of the sea
may beat thy grave stone daily.
Make thine epitaph, that death in me
at other lives may laugh.
O thou sweet king killer,
thou dear divorce 'twixt natural son and sire!
Thou bright defiler of Hymen's purest bed!
Thou valiant Mars!
Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,
whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
that lies on Dian's lap!
Thou visible god that solderest close impossibilities,
and makest them kiss.
Thou touch of hearts.
Think, thy slave man rebels,
and by thy virtue set them into confounding odds,
that beasts may have the world in empire!
Would 'twere so!
But not till I am dead.
I'll say thou hast gold.
Thou wilt be thronged to shortly.
Get back, I prithee!
Live, and love thy misery.
Long live so, and so die.
I am quit.
More things like men!
Eat, Timon, and abhor them.
Where should he have this gold?
It is some poor fragment,
some slender sort of his remainder.
The mere want of gold,
and the falling-from of his friends,
drove him into this melancholy.
It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.
Let us make the assay upon him.
If he care not for it, he will supply us easily;
if he covetously reserve it, how shall us get it?
True; for he bears it not about him.
It's hid.
Is not that he?
Where?
It is his description.
What, he?
I know him.
Save thee, Timon.
Now, thieves?
Soldiers, not thieves.
Both too;
and women's sons.
We are not thieves; we are men that much do want.
Your greatest want is, you want much meat.
Why should you want?
Behold, the earth hath roots;
within this mile break forth a hundred springs;
the oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet hips;
the bounteous housewife, nature,
on each bush lays her full mess before you.
Want!
Why want?
We cannot live on grass, berries, water,
as beasts, birds, and fishes.
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;
you must eat men.
Yet thanks I must you con that you are thieves professed,
that you work not in holier shapes.
For there is boundless theft in limited professions.
Rascal thieves, here's gold.
Go, suck the subtle blood of the grape,
till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
and so 'scape hanging.
Trust not the physician;
his antidotes are poison;
he slays more than you rob.
Take wealth and lives together;
do villainy, do, since you protest to do it, like workmen.
I'll example you with thievery.
The sun's a thief, and, with his great attraction,
robs the vast sea.
The moon's an arrant thief
whose pale fire is snatched from the sun.
The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge
resolves the moon into salt tears.
The earth's a thief that feeds and breeds
from the composture stolen from general excrement.
Each thing's a thief.
The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power,
has unchecked theft.
Love not yourselves.
Rob one another.
There's more gold.
Cut throats.
All that you meet are thieves.
To Athens go, break open shops;
nothing can you steal, but thieves do lose it.
Steal not less for this I give you;
and gold confound you howsoe'er.
Amen.
Has almost charmed me from my profession
by persuading me to it.
It is in the malice of mankind that he thus advises us;
not to have us thrive in our mystery.
I'll believe him as an enemy and give over my trade.
Let us first see peace in Athens.
There is no time so miserable a man may be true.
True.
O you gods.
Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
Full of decay and failing?
O monument and wonder of good deeds evilly disposed.
What an alteration of honor has desperate want made.
What viler thing upon the earth than friends
who can bring noblest minds to basest ends.
How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
when man was wished to love his enemies.
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
those who would mischief me than those that do.
Has caught me in his eye.
I will present my honest grief unto him;
and, as my lord, still serve him with my life.
My dearest master.
Away.
What art thou?
Have you forgot me, sir?
I have forgot all men;
then, if thou grantest thou art a man,
I have forgot thee.
An honest poor servant of yours.
Then I know thee not.
I never had honest men about me, I
all I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
The gods are witness,
ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief
for his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
Why dost thou weep?
Come nearer.
Then I love thee, because thou art a woman
and disclaimest flinty mankind,
whose eyes do never give but thorough lust and laughter.
Pity's sleeping.
Strange times that weep with laughing,
not with weeping.
I beg of you to know me, good my lord,
to accept my grief,
and whilst this poor wealth lasts,
to entertain me as your steward still.
Had I a steward so true, so just,
and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.
Let me behold thy face.
Surely, this man was born of woman.
Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
you perpetual-sober gods.
I do proclaim one honest man
mistake me not
but one; no more, I pray,
and he's a steward.
How fain I would have hated all mankind.
But thou redeemest thyself.
But all, save thee, I fell with curses.
Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;
for, by oppressing and betraying me,
thou mightst sooner got another service.
For many so arrive at second masters,
upon their first lord's neck.
But tell me true
for I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure
is not thy kindness subtle, covetous, and
and, as rich men deal gifts,
expecting in return twenty for one?
No, no, my most worthy master;
in whose breast doubt and suspect, alas,
are placed too late.
You should have feared false times when you did feast.
Suspect still comes where an estate is least.
That which I show, heaven knows,
is merely love, duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,
care of your food and living;
and, believe it, my most honored lord,
for any benefit that comes to me,
either in hope or present, I'd exchange for this one wish,
that you had power and wealth to requite me
by making rich yourself.
Why, look thee, 'tis so.
Thou singly honest man,
the gods out of my misery have sent thee treasure.
Go, live rich and happy;
but thus conditioned:
thou shalt build from men;
hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
but let the famished flesh slide from the bone,
ere thou relieve the beggar;
give to dogs what thou deniest to men;
let prisons swallow 'em up, debts wither 'em to nothing;
be men like blasted woods,
and diseases lick their false bloods.
So, so farewell and thrive.
Oh, let me stay and comfort you, my master.
Fly, whilst thou art blest and free!
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
As I took note of the place,
it cannot be far where he abides.
What's to be thought of him?
Does the rumour hold for true that he's so full of gold?
Certain.
Alcibiades reports it;
Phrynia and Timandra had gold of him.
He likewise enriched poor straggling soldiers
with great quantity.
Then this breaking of his
has been but a try for his friends.
Nothing else.
You shall see him a palm in Athens again
and flourish with the highest.
Therefore 'tis not amiss we tender our love to him
in this supposed distress of his.
It will show honestly in us
and is very likely to load our purposes
with what they travail for,
if it be a just and true report that goes of his having.
What have you now to present unto him?
Nothing at this time but my visitation.
Only I will promise him a most excellent piece.
I must serve him so too,
tell him of an intent that's coming towards him.
Good as the best.
Promising is the very air of the time.
It opens the eyes of expectation.
Performance is ever the duller for his act;
and, but in the plainer and simpler kind of people,
the deed of saying is quite out of use.
To promise is most courtly and fashionable.
Performance is a kind of will or testament
that argues a great sickness in his judgment that makes it.
I am thinking what I shall say that I have provided for him,
it must be a personating of himself,
a satire against the softness of prosperity,
with a discovery of the infinite flatteries
that follow youth and opulency.
Nay, let's seek him.
Then do we sin against our own estate,
when we may profit meet and come too late.
True;
when the day serves, before black-cornered night,
find what thou wantest by free and offered light.
Come.
Hail, worthy Timon!
Our late noble master.
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
Sir, having often of your open bounty tasted,
hearing you were retired,
your friends fallen off, whose thankless natures
O abhorred spirits
Not all the whips of heaven are large enough.
What!
to you, whose star-like nobleness
gave life and influence to their whole being.
I am rapt and cannot cover the monstrous bulk
of this ingratitude with any size of words.
Let it go naked; men may see it the better.
You that are honest, by being what you are,
make it best seen and known.
He and myself have travailed in the great
and sweetly felt it.
Ay, you are honest men.
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Most honest men.
How shall I requite you?
Can you eat root and drink cold water?
No?
What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.
You're honest men.
You've heard that I have gold?
I am sure you have.
Speak truth;
you're honest men.
So it is said, my noble lord;
but therefore came not my friend nor I.
Ay, good honest men.
Thou drawest the best counterfeit in all Athens.
Indeed, thou art the best;
Thou counterfeitest most lively.
So, so, my lord.
Even so, sir, as I say.
And, for thy fiction, why,
thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth,
thou art even natural in thine own art.
But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,
I must needs say you have a little fault.
Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you,
neither wish I you take much pains to mend.
Beseech Your Honor; make it known to us.
You'll take it ill.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Will you, indeed?
Doubt it not, worthy lord.
There's never a one of you that trusts a knave,
but mightily deceives you.
Do we, my lord?
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
know his gross patchery,
love him, feed him, keep in your bosom.
Yet remain assured, he's a made-up villain.
I know none such, my lord.
Nor I.
Look you, I love you well;
I'll give you gold;
rid me these villains from your companies.
Hang them, stab them, drown them in a draught,
confound them by some course,
come to me; I'll give you gold enough.
Name them, my lord; let's know them.
You that way and you this,
each man apart, but two in company,
all single and alone,
yet an arch-villain keeps him company.
If where thou art two villains shall not be,
come not near him.
If thou would not reside but where one villain is,
then him abandon.
Hence, pack!
You came for gold, you slaves.
There's gold.
You've worked for me;
there's payment!
You're an alchemist;
make gold of that.
Out, rascal dogs!
It is vain that you would speak with Timon;
for he is set so only to himself
that nothing but himself which looks like man
is friendly with him.
Bring us to him.
It is our part and promise to the Athenians
to speak with Timon.
At all times, alike men are not still the same.
'Twas time and griefs that framed him thus.
Time, with his fairer hand, offering the fortunes
of his former days,
the former man may make him.
Bring us to him, and chance it as it may.
Lord Timon.
Timon.
Look out, and speak to friends.
The Athenians, by two of their most reverend senate,
greet thee.
Speak to them, noble Timon.
Thou sun, that comforts, burn.
Speak, and be hanged.
For each true word, a blister,
and each false be as a cauterizing
to the root o' the tongue,
consuming it with speaking.
Worthy Timon
Of none but such as you and you of Timon.
The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
I thank them
and would send them back the plague,
could I but catch it for them.
Oh, forget what we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The senators with one consent of love
entreat thee back to Athens;
who have thought on special dignities,
which vacant lie for thy best use and wearing.
They confess towards thee
forgetfulness too general, gross.
You witch me in it;
surprise me to the very brink of tears.
Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
and I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
Therefore, so please thee to return with us
and of our Athens, thine and ours,
to take the captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
allowed with absolute power
and thy good name live with authority.
So soon we shall drive back of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
who, like a boar too savage,
doth root up his country's peace.
And shakes his threatening sword against the walls of Athens.
Therefore, Timon
Therefore, I will, sir;
therefore, I will, sir; thus.
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
let Alcibiades know this of Timon:
that Timon cares not.
But if he sack fair Athens
and take our goodly aged men by the beards,
giving our holy virgins to the stain
of contumelious, beastly, mad-brained war,
then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it.
In pity of our aged and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him
that I care not and let him take it at worst;
for their knives care not,
while you have throats to answer.
For myself, there's not a whittle in the unruly camp
but I do prize it at my love
before the reverendest throat in Athens.
So I leave you to the protection of the gods,
as thieves to keepers.
Stay not; all's in vain.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph.
It will be seen tomorrow.
My long sickness of health and living now begins to mend,
and nothing brings me all things.
Go; live still;
be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
and live so long enough.
We speak in vain.
But yet I love my country and am not one
that rejoices in the common wreck,
as common bruit doth put it.
That's well spoke.
Commend me to my loving countrymen
These words become your lips as they pass through them.
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
in their applauding gates.
Commend me to them,
and tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
their pangs of love, with other incident throes
that nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
in life's uncertain voyage,
I will some kindness do them.
I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.
I like this well;
he will return again.
I have a tree which grows here in my close
that mine own use invites me to cut down.
Shortly must I fell it.
Tell my friends, tell Athens, in sequence of degree
from high to low throughout,
that whoso please to stop affliction,
let him take his haste, come hither,
ere my tree hath felt the axe,
and hang himself.
I pray you, do my greeting.
Trouble him no further;
thus you still shall find him.
Come not to me again,
but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
who, once a day, with his embossed froth,
the turbulent surge shall cover.
Thither come; let my gravestone be your oracle.
Lips, let four words go by and language end.
What is amiss plague and infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, death their gain.
Sun, hide thy beams.
Timon hath done his reign.
His discontents are unremovably coupled to nature.
Our hope in him is dead.
Let us return and strain
what other means are left to us in our dear peril.
It requires swift foot.
The enemy's drum is heard,
and fearful scouring doth choke the air with dust.
On and prepare.
Ours is the fall, I fear,
our foes the snare.
Till now you have gone on
and filled the time with all licentious measure,
making your wills the scope of justice;
till now, myself and such
as slept within the shadow of your power,
have wandered with our traversed arms,
and breathed our sufferance vainly.
Now the time is flush,
when crouching marrow in the bearer
strong cries of itself, "No more."
Now breathless wrong shall sit and pant
in your great chairs of ease,
and pursy insolence shall break his wind
with fear and horrid flight.
Noble and young, when thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
we sent to thee to give thy rages balm,
to wipe out our ingratitude with loves above their quantity.
So did we woo transformed Timon to our city's love
by humble message and by promised means.
We were not all unkind,
nor all deserve the common stroke of war.
These walls of ours were not erected by their hands
from whom you have received your griefs;
nor are they such that these great towers,
trophies, and schools should fall for private faults in them.
Nor are they living that were the motives that you first went out;
shame that they wanted cunning,
in excess hath broke their hearts.
March, noble lord, into our city with thy banners spread.
By decimation, and a tithed death
if thy revenges hunger for that food which nature loathes
take thou the destined tenth,
and by the hazard of the spotted die, let die the spotted.
All have not offended;
for those that were,
it is not square to take on those that are revenge.
Crimes, like lands, are not inherited.
Then, dear countryman, bring in thy ranks,
but leave without thy rage.
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
which in the bluster of thy wrath
must fall with those that have offended.
Like a shepherd, approach the fold,
and cull the infected forth, but kill not all together.
What thou wilt, thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
than hew to it with thy sword.
Set but thy foot against our rampired gates,
and they shall ope;
so thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
to say thou'lt enter friendly.
Throw thy glove, or any token of thine honor else,
that thou wilt use these wars as thy redress
and not as our confusion,
all thy powers shall make their harbor in our town,
till we have sealed thy full desires.
Then there's my glove.
Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof fall
and no more.
And to atone your fears with my more noble meaning,
not a man shall pass his quarter
or offend the stream of regular justice in your city's bounds,
but shall be rendered to your public laws at heaviest answer.
'Tis most nobly spoken.
My noble general, Timon is dead;
entombed upon the very hem of the sea;
and on his grave-stone this insculpture,
which with wax I brought away,
whose soft impression interprets for my poor ignorance.
"Here lies a wretched corse, wretched soul bereft.
"Seek not my name.
"A plague consume you wicked caitiffs left.
"Here lie I, Timon,
"who, alive, all living men did hate.
"Pass by and curse thy fill,
but pass and stay not here thy gait."
These well express in thee thy latter spirits.
Though thou abhorredst in us our human griefs,
scornedst our brain's flow and those our droplets
which from niggard nature fall,
yet rich conceit taught thee to make vast Neptune weep
for aye on thy low grave, on faults forgiven.
Dead is noble Timon
of whose memory hereafter more.
Bring me into your city,
and I will use the olive with my sword,
make war breed peace, make peace stint war,
make each prescribe to other as each other's leech.